.\" nmdns.8 - Multicast DNS responder/repeater daemon
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0-or-later
.\"
.TH NMDNS 8 2026\-04\-27 "nmdns 0.2.0" "Linux System Administration"
.SH NAME
nmdns \- mDNS/DNS\-SD responder, cache, and cross\-interface repeater
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nmdns
.RB [ \-c
.IR config ]
.br
.B nmdns
.B \-\-check
.RB [ \-c
.IR config ]
.br
.B nmdns
.B \-h
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nmdns
is a daemon for Linux hosts that bridge multiple link\-local network
segments (routers, gateways, VLANs, container bridges, and similar).
mDNS uses link\-local multicast with IP TTL=1; a Layer\-3 router drops
these packets at the segment boundary.
.B nmdns
bridges the gap without requiring changes to clients or services.
.PP
The daemon provides four facilities:
.TP
.B Cache
Every DNS resource record seen on any monitored interface is parsed and
stored with its TTL.
The cache drives TTL tracking, diagnostics, and cross\-interface responses.
.TP
.B Respond
Answers \fBA\fR, \fBAAAA\fR, \fBPTR\fR, \fBSRV\fR, and \fBTXT\fR queries
for the host's own \fI<hostname>.local.\fR name and any DNS\-SD services
declared in the configuration file.
At startup the daemon probes for uniqueness (RFC\ 6762, \(sc8.1), then
announces all records twice (RFC\ 6762, \(sc8.3).
On shutdown it sends goodbye packets (TTL=0) twice (RFC\ 6762, \(sc10.1).
.TP
.B Browse
Periodically issues \fBPTR\fR queries for configured service types, keeping
the cache warm for clients that never query independently.
Query intervals obey the exponential back\-off defined by RFC\ 6762, \(sc5.2.
.TP
.B Repeat
Optionally re\-multicasts raw mDNS frames across interfaces so legacy clients
that speak mDNS directly (rather than querying a shared cache) can discover
devices on other segments.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-c " config"
Path to the TOML configuration file.
Default: \fI/etc/nmdns.toml\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-check
Validate the configuration file, print a summary, and exit.
See
.B EXIT STATUS
below.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TS
tab(:) box;
rb l.
0:Success.
2:Command\-line usage error.
10:Configuration file load, parse, or structural validation failed.
11:\fB\-\-check\fR semantic validation failed (e.g., invalid DNS name).
14:Tokio async runtime creation failed.
20:Network interface or socket setup failed.
22:Service record construction failed during startup.
.TE
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file uses TOML syntax.
An annotated example is installed at
.IR /usr/share/doc/nmdns/nmdns.toml .
.SS Top-level keys
.TP
.B interfaces \fR(list of strings, required)
Network interface names the daemon monitors.
At least one entry is required.
.TP
.B repeat \fR(bool, default: \fBtrue\fR)
Re\-multicast raw mDNS frames between interfaces.
Set to \fBfalse\fR for responder\-only operation.
.TP
.B answer_from_cache \fR(bool, default: \fBtrue\fR)
Answer queries using records learned on a different configured interface.
Records are never answered back onto the interface where they were learned.
.TP
.B hostname \fR(string, default: system hostname)
Bare hostname advertised as \fIhostname\fB.local.\fR on every interface.
.TP
.B blacklist \fR(list of CIDR strings, default: [])
Drop all traffic from source addresses that fall within any listed prefix.
Mutually exclusive with \fBwhitelist\fR.
.TP
.B whitelist \fR(list of CIDR strings, default: [])
Accept traffic only from source addresses that fall within a listed prefix.
Mutually exclusive with \fBblacklist\fR.
.TP
.B browse \fR(list of DNS names, default: ["_services._dns-sd._udp.local."])
Service types to query actively.
The default causes all DNS\-SD service types on the link to be discovered
(RFC\ 6763, \(sc9).
.TP
.B browse_interval_secs \fR(integer, default: \fB60\fR)
Upper bound on the exponential back\-off interval between browse queries, in
seconds.
.TP
.B cache_tick_secs \fR(integer, default: \fB5\fR)
Period of the cache eviction sweep, in seconds.
.TP
.B max_cache_entries \fR(integer, default: \fB4096\fR)
Maximum number of records in the cache.
When the limit is reached, the nearest\-to\-expiry entry is evicted.
.TP
.B cache_max_ttl_secs \fR(integer, default: no cap)
Cap the TTL of every cached record to this many seconds.
When \fBanswer_from_cache\fR is enabled, a malicious device on any monitored
link can inject bogus records that propagate across all bridges; setting this
option limits how long such a poisoned record can persist.
Lower values reduce the attack window but also shorten the lifetime of
legitimate long\-lived service records (DNS\-SD PTR/SRV/TXT use 4500 s by
default).
Leave unset to preserve original TTLs.
Must be between 1 and 4294967295 (u32 max); a value of 0 is rejected because
it would effectively clear the cache on every insert.
.SS Service records
Each \fB[[service]]\fR table publishes one DNS\-SD service instance.
.TP
.B name \fR(string, required)
Human\-readable instance name (e.g., \fIOffice Printer\fR).
.TP
.B service \fR(string, required)
DNS\-SD service type (e.g., \fI_ipp._tcp.local.\fR).
.TP
.B port \fR(integer 1\(en65535, required)
Port number placed in the \fBSRV\fR record.
.TP
.B txt \fR(list of strings, default: [])
Key=value pairs for the \fBTXT\fR record (e.g., \fIrp=ipp/print\fR).
.TP
.B host \fR(string, default: daemon hostname)
Override the target hostname in the \fBSRV\fR record.
.SH RFC 6762 CONFORMANCE
The following RFC\ 6762 rules are implemented.
Each is covered by a test in \fItests/rfc6762.rs\fR;
run \fBcargo test \-\-test rfc6762\fR to execute the suite.
.TS
tab(:) box;
lb lb lb
l l l.
Section:Rule:Status
\(sc3:Hostnames are <single-label>.local.:yes
\(sc3:IPv6 mDNS multicast address is ff02::fb:yes
\(sc5.2:Browser: 20\(en120 ms initial jitter:yes
\(sc5.2:Browser: exponential back\-off, doubling each query:yes
\(sc6:Unique\-answer / probe\-defense: respond without delay:yes
\(sc6:Shared / multi\-question: 20\(en120 ms randomized delay:yes
\(sc6:TC bit set on query: 400\(en500 ms randomized delay:yes
\(sc6:Per\-(record, iface) 1 s minimum multicast interval:yes
\(sc6:Per\-(AAAA, iface) 1 s minimum multicast interval:yes
\(sc6:Probe\-defense uses 250 ms interval:yes
\(sc7.1:Known\-Answer Suppression (TTL >= 50% rule):yes
\(sc7.1:Known\-Answer Suppression for AAAA records:yes
\(sc8.1:Probe: 0\(en250 ms initial random jitter:yes
\(sc8.1:Probe: three probes 250 ms apart:yes
\(sc8.1:Probe format (qtype=ANY, QU bit, Authority Section):yes
\(sc8.1:Detect incoming probes via Authority Section:yes
\(sc8.1:Detect incoming AAAA probes via Authority Section:yes
\(sc8.3:Announcement gap >= 1 s:yes
\(sc10.1:Goodbye: TTL=0 on host A/AAAA and service PTR/SRV/TXT:yes
\(sc10.1:Receiver: TTL=0 deletes the cached record:yes
\(sc10.2:Cache\-flush bit on unique records only (not shared PTR):yes
\(sc10.2:Cache\-flush bit on host AAAA records:yes
\(sc11:Source\-address filter (CIDR blacklist / whitelist):yes
\(sc11:IPv6 source\-address filter (CIDR blacklist / whitelist):yes
\(sc11:IP TTL=255 on outgoing mDNS sockets:yes
\(sc18.4:Authoritative Answer bit set on responses:yes
\(sc8.2:Simultaneous\-probe tiebreaking / rename\-on\-conflict:no
\(sc6.1:NSEC negative responses:no
\(sc7.2:Multi\-packet Known\-Answer aggregation:no
.TE
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.BR SIGTERM ", " SIGINT
Initiate graceful shutdown: transmit goodbye packets (TTL=0) on every
interface, then exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/nmdns.toml
Default configuration file.
.TP
.I /usr/share/doc/nmdns/nmdns.toml
Annotated example configuration.
.SH NOTES
.B nmdns
requires sufficient privilege to bind UDP port\ 5353 and to join multicast
groups.
Run as
.B root
or grant
.BR CAP_NET_BIND_SERVICE " and " CAP_NET_RAW .
.PP
Interfaces may be IPv4\-only, IPv6\-only, or dual\-stack.
IPv6 operation requires a usable link\-local address (\fIfe80::/10\fR) on
each configured interface.
.SH EXAMPLES
Respond for the host's own name and two services on two interfaces:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
# /etc/nmdns.toml
interfaces = ["br\-lan", "br\-iot"]
hostname   = "gateway"

[[service]]
name    = "Web UI"
service = "_http._tcp.local."
port    = 80
txt     = ["path=/"]

[[service]]
name    = "SSH"
service = "_ssh._tcp.local."
port    = 22
.EE
.RE
.PP
Validate the configuration and exit:
.PP
.RS 4
.EX
nmdns \-\-check \-c /etc/nmdns.toml
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR avahi\-daemon (8),
.BR mdnsd (8),
.BR dns\-sd (1)
.PP
RFC\ 6762 \(em Multicast DNS.
.br
RFC\ 6763 \(em DNS\-Based Service Discovery.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the nmdns contributors.
.SH COLOPHON
This page is part of the \fBnmdns\fR project.
Source and issue tracker: https://github.com/hlhc/nmdns
